---
title: Papert in Praise of Intuition
author: Mynt
layout: post
tags: meta
---
In chapter 6 of *Mindstorms*, Seymour Papert posits a hypothetical conversation between GAL and ARI over a familiar question in the history of physics: do objects fall at a velocity proportionate to or independent of their weight? ARI, our hypothetical Aristotle, believes that a heavier object will fall faster than a lighter one while GAL, our hypothetical Galileo, is trying to convince ARI that this is not the case. The conversation is as follows

> GAL: Look, your theory has got to be wrong. Here's a two-pound and a one-pound ball. The two-pound ball takes two seconds to fall to the ground. Tell me, how long do you think the one-pound ball would need?

> ARI: I suppose it would take four seconds. Anyway, much more than two seconds.

> GAL: I thought you would say that. But now please answer another question. I am about to drop two one-pounders simultaneously. How long will the pair of them take to reach the ground?

> ARI: That's not another question. I gave my opinion that one-pound balls take four seconds. Two of them must do the same. Each falls independently.

> GAL: You are consistent with yourself if two bodies are two bodies, not one.

> ARI: As they are ... of course.

> GAL: But now if I connect them by a gossamer thread... is this now two bodies or one? Will it (or they) take two seconds or four to fall to the ground?

> ARI: I am truly confused. Let me think . . . . It's one body, but then it should fall for four seconds before reaching the earth. But then this would mean that a thread finer than silk could slow down a furiously falling ball of iron. It seems impossible. But if I say it is two bodies ... I am in deep trouble. What is a body? How do I know when one becomes two? And if I cannot know then how sure can I be of my laws of falling bodies? (142)

Papert admits that GAL's argument is not fool-proof, but his focus here is on why this explanation is particularly "subversive of the kind of theory expounded by ARI". (142) The latter kind of theory is one which Papert connects to the tendency in education to teach skills and facts over other more personal ways of knowing. The examples he gives of the more personal ways are manifested in metaphors that Papert finds adults using to describe their learning. Per Papert, adults refer more to "*getting to know* an idea, *exploring* an area of knowledge, and *acquiring sensitivity* to distinctions" rather than specific and discrete skills and facts (136). While facts and skills are "easier to measure" and thus easier to test for, the other kinds of getting to know an idea are a more robust kind of learning for Papert. 

GAL's argument models the kind of identificatory work that Papert associates with the LOGO Turtle which *Mindstorms* is primarily concerned with. Where in LOGO learning environments, children explore what the Turtle can do by connecting its capacity for movement with their own, practicing how one would draw a shape with ones' own body and then using that practice to inform their programming instructions for the Turtle, GAL is asking ARI both to imagine manipulating the two balls and in a sense to imagine being those balls. This is a key aspect of Papert's thought concerning the pedagogical value of computers, that transitional objects which we can imagine our own bodies in the place of are essential for the kind of personal syntonic learning that connects what we are learning to what we already know. 

The concepts of syntonicity (a harmony or fittedness between a person and one's environment) and transitional objects (coined by D.W. Winnicott referring to a kind of object use in children which eases the child from the mother to external object relations) both play essential roles in Papert's thinking here and tracing their intellectual lineages and legacies is essential to the intellectual history work we are doing in the Thinking With Computers project. Here, though, I want to connect these concepts to another recurrent concept in *Mindstorms*: intuition.

One of the more endearing and inspirational aspects of Papert's optimism in *Mindstorms* is his focus on and celebration of children's intuitions. Saying explicitly that the overriding of intuition with formal reasoning is "one of the most destructive blocks to learning" (*Mindstorms* 144), one way to frame Papert's mission in *Mindstorms* is the redevelopment of trust in our intuitions by way of reframing error as something to be debugged rather than something to be dismayed by. Debugging is the key conceptual prerequisite for most of the pedagogical discussions in *Mindstorms*, whether they be related to mathematics, physics, or education itself. 

ARI's last contribution to the hypothetical conversation is a demonstration of debugging as a practice.  ARI imagines the scenario GAL lays out and finds that his intuition about the weight of the object conflicts with other intuitions: "What is a body? How do I know when one becomes two?" The hope would be that GAL's argument about the intuitive understanding of bodies, a more basic intuition than that concerning *falling bodies* would help ARI change his intuitions. GAL is offering debugging as an alternative to distrust of intuitions. 

Such a configuring of intuitions as fixed and unchanging parts of ourselves which need to be rectified by formal proof and calculation is the major target of this chapter of *Mindstorms*. Papert tags this idea as a block which leads to children giving up on learning a whole variety of fields and ideas. Instead, *Mindstorms* advocates for an understanding of intuition that is maleable and a key contributor to life-long learning. 

By focusing on this understanding of intuition as a prerequisite for learning, I think we can understand some of Papert's grander claims about the transformational impact that computers can have in the learning environment. Papert is clear about the student-centred approach that computers allow for: "while good teachers play the role of mutual friends who can provide introductions, the actual job of getting to known an idea or a person cannot be done by a third party." (137) Programming and debugging the LOGO Turtle as a body-syntonic transitional object keeps the learning happening in the first person. More than that, it affects the "attitude of the learner" as it keeps learning in the safe environment and play of the child's interaction with their transitional object-turtle (safety and play are important features of this concept from Winnicott). (151) Learning and play become intertwined leading to a positive attitude towards learning itself. 

Papert's intervention with LOGO as classroom environment is thus trying to create a virtuous cycle: computers as syntonic learning environments building healthier relations to one's intuitions, that view of intuitions leading to a healthier attitutde towards learning, those attitudes toward learning and intuitions leading to building better computers and tools for more syntonic learning environments. If make people's attitudes toward learning better by making their environments better, those people might go on to make even better environments which will make even better attitudes toward learning. 

I frame this aspect of Papert's work in this way to draw a few connections to Papert's intellectual history. The first is to John Dewey's work in *Art as Experience* where he argues against art being separate from the domains of everyday life. Connecting the quality of life and imagination to the aesthetic character of one's surroundings, Dewey argues that "neither art nor civilization is secure" unless "the mass of men and women who do the useful work of the world have the opportunity to be free in conducting the processes of production and are richley endowed in capacity for enjoying the fruits of collective work." (344) In other words, the capacity for everyone in a society to live amongst that civilization's artistic achievements produces better contribution to that society in both aesthetic and non-aesthetic realms. 

Papert cites Dewey's work on education broadly throughout his books but this cyclical environmental story seems important to identify as it connects both Dewey and Papert to a broader trend in American mid-century thought traced by Fred Turner's book *The Democratic Surround*. Turner's book documents a similar kind of environment-subject relation wherein better environments produce better subjects who in turn produce better environments. Turner identifies this in his concept of the democratic surround, a media genre which was both "a way of organizing images and sounds" as well as "a way of thinking about organizing society" more democraticaly. (9)

As Papert says in *Mindstorms* and emphasizes in his latter book *The Connected Family*, he was not a naive optimist about the impact computers will have on society. While it is easy to read his optimism in *Mindstorms* as naive given both that his vision for computers in the classroom did not come to pass as well as the place computers hold in our lives in 2022, understanding Papert's wider vision for how learning itself should change can give us a different vantage from which to look at precisely how we can think with computers better now and in the future. 
